## Task 4 Report: Setup and Use a Firewall on Linux (UFW)

#Objective
Configure and test basic firewall rules to allow or block traffic using UFW (Uncomplicated Firewall) on Kali Linux.

#Steps and Results

1. Check current firewall status and rules
command- sudo ufw status verbose
Output:Status: inactive
At this stage, UFW was installed but not active.

2. Enable UFW firewall
command- sudo ufw enable
output- "Firewall is active and enabled on system startup"

3. Verify firewall status after enabling
command- sudo ufw status verbose
output- Status: active
Logging: on (low)
Default: deny (incoming), allow (outgoing), deny (routed)
New profiles: skip

4. List current firewall rules with numbering
command- sudo ufw status numbered
output- Status: active
(No rules yet at this point)

5. Block inbound traffic on port 23 (Telnet)
command- sudo ufw deny 23
output- Rule added
Rule added (v6)

6. Test the blocked port (Telnet)
command- telnet localhost 23
output- Trying ::1...
Connection failed: Connection refused
Trying 127.0.0.1...
telnet: Unable to connect to remote host: Connection refused
(Explanation: Telnet connection was refused confirming that the firewall blocked port 23 successfully)

7. Allow SSH traffic on port 22
command- sudo ufw allow 22
output- Rule added
Rule added (v6)

8. Remove the block rule on port 23 (restore original state)
command-sudo ufw delete deny 23
output- Rule deleted
Rule deleted (v6)

9. Final list of active rules
command- sudo ufw status numbered
output- Status: active

     To                         Action      From
     --                         ------      ----
[ 1] 22                         ALLOW IN    Anywhere                  
[ 2] 22 (v6)                    ALLOW IN    Anywhere (v6)             


##Summary
-UFW was installed and enabled on Kali Linux.

-A rule was created to block incoming traffic on port 23 (Telnet), which was confirmed by the inability to connect via Telnet.

-Another rule was added to allow incoming SSH traffic on port 22, ensuring secure remote management.

-The block on port 23 was removed to restore the original firewall state.

-The firewall by default blocks all incoming connections unless explicitly allowed.

-Firewall filtering is based on rules specifying ports and protocols, which control whether traffic is allowed or denied.



##How Firewalls Filter Traffic
Firewalls examine incoming and outgoing network packets and apply rules to allow or deny traffic based on parameters like:

Source and destination IP address

Port number (e.g., 22 for SSH, 23 for Telnet)

Protocol (TCP/UDP)

Direction (inbound/outbound)

This filtering helps secure systems by controlling network access and minimizing exposure to potential attacks.
